.\" Manpage for udocker
.\" Contact udocker@lip.pt to correct errors or typos.
.\" To read this man page use:   man -l udocker.1
.TH udocker 1 "31 Oct 2019" "version 1.1.4" "udocker man page"
.SH NAME
udocker \- execute Docker containers in user space without privileges
.SH SYNOPSIS
udocker [OPTIONS] COMMAND [CMDOPTIONS] [PARAMETERS]
.SH DESCRIPTION
udocker is a basic user tool to execute simple Docker containers in user space without requiring root privileges. Enables basic download and execution of Docker containers by non-privileged users in Linux systems when Docker is not available. It can be used to access and execute the content of Docker containers in Linux batch systems and interactive clusters that are managed by other entities such as grid infrastructures or externally managed batch or interactive systems.

udocker does not require any type of privileges nor the deployment of services by system administrators.

udocker is a wrapper around several tools to mimic a subset of the Docker capabilities including pulling images and running then with minimal functionality.

udocker provides several approaches (execution modes) to facilitate the execution of Docker containers across different Linux distributions and environments.

.SH OPTIONS
Options common to all commands. These options must be specified before the udocker specific command. The following example performs an image "pull" with insecure and debug: "udocker --insecure --debug pull myimage"

.TP
.BR \--quiet ", " \-q
Less verbosity, also removes displaying of headers and banners.
.TP
.BR \--debug ", " \-D
Increase verbosity.
.TP
.BR \--repo=directory
Specify an alternate location for the local repository of images and containers, overriding the use of $HOME/.udocker.
.TP
.BR \--insecure
Allow insecure https communication.
.TP
.BR \--allow-root
Running under a privileged user, this is NOT safe and is NOT recommended. 

.SH COMMANDS
udocker supports a subset of Docker commands and uses a similar syntax for IMAGE names. An IMAGE name is defined as REPOSITORY/IMAGE:TAG. By default udocker searches and pulls images from Docker Hub. Private repositories are also supported. 

udocker manages a local repository kept by default under $HOME/.udocker. The local repository contains the IMAGES and the CONTAINERS created from those IMAGES. The local repository also contains tools and libraries used by udocker.

Supported commands:
.TP
.BR help
Prints a usage summary. Further help for specific udocker commands can be obtained with "udocker COMMAND -h | --help".
.TP
.BR search " " [ " " \-a " " ] " " | " " [ " " \--list-tags " " ] " " | " " [ " " --registry=REGISTRY " " ] " " | " " STRING
Search for IMAGES in a Docker registry. Not all registries support searching. The \-a option displays all matching entries without pausing. The \--list-tags option lists the tags for a given repository in this case STRING must be a repository name.
.TP
.BR pull " " [ " " \--httpproxy=PROXY " " | " " \--index=INDEX " " | " " \--registry=REGISTRY " " ] " " IMAGE
Pull an IMAGE from Docker Hub or from a private repository. A socks4 or socks5 proxy can be specified with \--httpproxy the syntax of PROXY is socks[4|5]://user:pass@host:port. The --registry and --index options enable other repositories (beyond dockerhub) to be selected, it is an URL prefix (ex. https://myrepository.mydomain).
.TP
.BR images " " [ " " \-l " " ]
Lists IMAGES available in the local udocker repository. The \-l option provides additional image details.
.TP
.BR create " " [ " " --name=ALIAS " " ] " " IMAGE
Creates a container for execution from an IMAGE stored in the local repository. Multiple containers can be extracted from a single image. Each created container is identified by a CONTAINER-ID which is printed upon successful extraction. The option --name allows an ALIAS name to be assigned to the newly created container to facilitate identification. The ALIAS can later be used instead of the CONTAINER-ID.
.TP
.BR ps " " [ " " \-m " " ] " " | " " [ " " \-s " " ]
List containers in the local repository. These are containers produced with the command "create" and that can be executed with the command "run". The list contains the CONTAINER-ID, the protection flag against deletion, write status, ALIASEs, and the corresponding IMAGE. The command name "ps" has been kept for compatibility with the Docker command line, in udocker the command ps does not show running containers instead shows the created containers extracted to the filesystem that are ready to be executed. The option \-m adds the execution mode. The option \-s adds the size in MB.
.TP
.BR rm " " [ " " -f " " ] " " CONTAINER\-ID " " | " " ALIAS " " ...
Delete containers using the CONTAINER\-ID or ALIAS. The flag -f forces the removal by changing the file protections.
.TP
.BR inspect " " IMAGE " " | " " [ " " \-p " " ] " " CONTAINER\-ID " " | " " [ " " \-p " " ] " " ALIAS
Print information about an IMAGE or CONTAINER. The \-p option applies only to CONTAINERS and prints the pathname to the root of the CONTAINER directory tree. Useful for direct access to the CONTAINER files.
.TP
.BR name " " CONTAINER\-ID " " ALIAS
Assign a new ALIAS to a given CONTAINER\-ID. With ALIASEs the containers can be accessed both using the ALIAS name or the CONTAINER-ID.
.TP
.BR rmname " " ALIAS
Remove an ALIAS. The CONTAINER itself is not affected and can be used via its CONTAINER-ID.
.TP
.BR rename " " ALIAS " " NEWALIAS
Change a given container ALIAS name.
.TP
.BR rmi " " [ " " -f " " ] " " IMAGE
Delete an IMAGE in the local repository. Any related CONTAINERS previously extracted are NOT affected by the parent IMAGE removal. The option \-f forces the deletion, and can be used when the IMAGE structure is damaged.
.TP
.BR import " " [ " " --mv " " ] " " TARBALL " " IMAGE " " | " " - " " IMAGE 
.TP
.BR import " " --tocontainer " " --name=ALIAS " " TARBALL " " | " " --tocontainer " " --name=ALIAS " " - " "
.TP
.BR import " " --clone " " --name=ALIAS " " TARBALL " " | " " --clone " " --name=ALIAS " " - " "
Import a tarball from file or stdin. The tarball can be imported into a new image or container. The first form can be used to import a container exported by docker into a new image. The second form uses --tocontainer to import directly into a container without creating an image. The third form uses --clone to import a udocker container (e.g. exported with udocker export --clone) into a new container without creating an image, preserving the container metadata and execution modes. When importing to an image (default) the option --mv will try to move the tarball file into the repository instead of copying the content. When importing to a container the option --name can be used to provide a name alias to the created container.
.TP
.BR load " " - " "
.TP
.BR load " " -i " " IMAGE\-TARBALL
Load an IMAGE\-TARBALL previously saved by "docker save". The IMAGE\-TARBALL contains the several layers of a Docker layered filesystem plus the associated metadata. The image and its layers are loaded into the local images repository. The load command also supports loading of OCI container images (EXPERIMENTAL).
.TP
.BR save " " -o " " - " " IMAGE
.TP
.BR save " " -o " " IMAGE\-TARBALL " " IMAGE
Save an image stored in the local images repository to a tarball. The IMAGE\-TARBALL contains the several layers of a Docker layered filesystem plus the associated metadata. The tarball will contain the image metadata and all the individual layers that compose it. The saved tarball can be loaded into another repository using the command load. 
.TP
.BR verify " " IMAGE
Verify the integrity of an IMAGE in the local repository.
.TP
.BR clone " " CONTAINER\-ID " " | " " --name=ALIAS " " CONTAINER\-ID
Duplicate an existing container creating a complete replica. The replica receives a different CONTAINER\-ID. An ALIAS can be assigned to the newly created container by using --name.
.TP
.BR protect " " IMAGE " " | " " CONTAINER\-ID " " | " " ALIAS
Protect an IMAGE or CONTAINER against accidental deletion by "udocker rm" or "udocker rmi". Does not protect against deletion by operating system commands.
.TP
.BR unprotect " " IMAGE " " | " " CONTAINER\-ID " " | " " ALIAS
Remove a protection flag placed by "protect".
.TP
.BR mkrepo " " DIRECTORY
Setup a local repository in the host DIRECTORY. The required directory structure is created.
.TP
.BR login " " --username=USERNAME " " | " " --password=PASSWORD " " | " " --registry=REGISTRY
Setup of authentication information for access to remote Docker registries. Enables "pull" of IMAGES from private registries. The option --registry can be used to access registries other than the default dockerhub. If USERNAME or PASSWORD are not provided in the command line, the user will be prompted to provide them.
.TP
.BR logout " " [ " " \-a " " ] " " | " " --registry=REGISTRY
Remove authentication information created by "login". By default authentication is removed for the default REGISTRY. A specific REGISTRY can be specified with --registry. Alternatively ALL previously entered authentication information can be removed with the -a option.
.TP
.BR setup " "  --execmode=<Pn> " " | " " --execmode=<Fn> " " |  " " --execmode=<Rn> " " | " " --execmode=<Sn> " " | " " --force " " | " "  --nvidia " " | " " --purge " " CONTAINER\-ID
Change container execution settings. The option --execmode enables selection of an alternative execution engine. In certain cases when experiencing execution errors changing the execution mode to mode P2 may solve the problem. The option --force can be used with --execmode to force a given execution mode upon a setup error. The option --nvidia enables access to GPGPUs by adding the necessary host libraries to the container (EXPERIMENTAL). The option --force can also be used with --nvidia to force the setup of the nvidia environment. The option --purge cleans mountpoints and auxiliary files created by udocker.
.TP
.BR run " " [ " " RUNOPTIONS " " ] " " IMAGE " " | " " CONTAINER-ID " " | " " ALIAS " " [ " " COMMAND " " ARG1 " " ARG2 " " ... " " ]
Execute a CONTAINER identified by CONTAINER-ID or ALIAS name. If an IMAGE name is provided instead of a CONTAINER-ID or ALIAS, then a CONTAINER will be automatically created from the specified IMAGE and executed. The "run" command will try to respect the execution information specified in the container or image metadata, if such information is not provided it will try to find a shell interpreter inside the container and execute it. Optionally a COMMAND to be executed inside the CONTAINER environment can be provided in the command line. The following RUNOPTIONS are available:
.RS
.TP
--rm
Remove the CONTAINER after execution.
.TP
--workdir=DIR
Change to a given working directory inside the container.
.TP
--user=USER
Use the given USER as username or uid inside the container.
.TP 
--volume=HOSTDIR:CONTAINERDIR
.PD 0
.TP 
-v=HOSTDIR:CONTAINERDIR
Make the host directory HOSTDIR visible inside of the container as directory CONTAINERDIR. If CONTAINERDIR is not specified it will default to the same pathname of HOSTDIR. Example "udocker run -v=/tmp:/scratch mycontainer" will make the host /tmp visible inside the container as /scratch.
.PD
.TP
--novol=HOSTDIR
udocker makes several host directories visible inside the container. The option --novol prevents specific directories from being made visible. Example "udocker run --novol=/dev mycontainer" will prevent the host /dev from being visible in the container.
.TP
--env="VAR=VALUE"
Define an environment variable.
.TP
--hostauth
Obtain user account details from the host and add them to the container passwd and group.
.TP
--nosysdirs
udocker makes several host directories visible inside the container. The list of host directories includes /dev /proc /sys /etc/resolv.conf /etc/host.conf /lib/modules. This option prevents all these directories from being visible inside the container.
.TP
--nometa
Ignore the container metadata.
.TP
--dri
Makes host directories containing dri libraries visible inside the container.
.TP
--hostenv
Passes the environment variables from the user session in the host to the container.
.TP
--cpuset-cpus="1,2-3"
Binds the processes to the given CPUs.
.TP
--name=ALIAS
Add an ALIAS to the CONTAINER.
.TP
--bindhome
Make the user home directory visible inside the container.
.TP
--location=HOSTDIR
Use a directory tree directly. Instead of using a CONTAINER from the local repository, udocker will use HOSTDIR as the root of an operating system directory tree. Allows execution of systems in foreign locations similarly to a chroot. 
.TP
--kernel=N.N.N 
Emulate a given kernel to enable execution in very old host kernels.
.TP
--publish=HOST_PORT:CONT_PORT
Map a container port to another port in the host, only available in Pn modes. (EXPERIMENTAL)
.TP
--publish-all
Map container ports to different random ports, only available in Pn modes. (EXPERIMENTAL)
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_DIR
Override the location of the local repository.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_BIN
Override location of udocker related executables.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_LIB
Override location of udocker related libraries.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_CONTAINERS
Override location of udocker containers.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_TMP
Override location of udocker temporary directory default is /tmp.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_KEYSTORE
Override location of udocker keystore default is $HOME/.udocker/keystore.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_TARBALL
Location of a tarball containing a udocker distribution for installation or upgrade. Example "export UDOCKER_TARBALL=udocker_1.0.1.tgz; tar xzvf $UDOCKER_TARBALL udocker; ./udocker".
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_LOGLEVEL
A number defining the verbosity of udocker. Zero is the least verbose. 
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_REGISTRY
Override the default udocker registry pointing to Docker Hub.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_INDEX
Override the default udocker index pointing to Docker Hub.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_DEFAULT_EXECUTION_MODE
Change the default execution mode, not all modes are supported as default execution mode.
.TP
UDOCKER_FAKECHROOT_SO.BR UDOCKER_USE_CURL_EXECUTABLE
Forces the use of a curl executable instead of pycurl and enables selection of a given curl executable pathname.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_USE_PROOT_EXECUTABLE
For Pn modes forces the use of a given proot executable instead of the default from udockertools.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_USE_RUNC_EXECUTABLE
For Rn modes forces the use of a given runc executable. By default udocker searches for a runc executable in the PATH, if it does not find one it will use the runc provided by udockertools.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_USE_SINGULARITY_EXECUTABLE
For Sn modes forces the use of a given singularity executable. By default udocker searches for a singularity executable in the PATH. Singularity is not provided in the udockertools.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_FAKECHROOT_SO
For Fn modes forces the use of a given fakechroot sharable library. By default udocker will use the libraries provided in udockertools.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_FAKECHROOT_EXPAND_SYMLINKS
For Fn modes controls translation of symbolic links in volume pathnames. A value of "true" enables correct translation at the expense of additional time and capacity. A default value of "none" enables automatic selection. A value of "false" disables the expansion of symbolic links in volume pathnames.
.TP
.BR UDOCKER_NOSYSCONF
Ignore settings in udocker system configuration files.

.SH FILES
.TP
.BR $HOME/.udocker
Default local repository for IMAGES and CONTAINERS.
.TP
.BR $HOME/.udocker/udocker.conf
udocker user configuration file. Enables to changing the value of the Config class attributes. Example "http_insecure = True" changes the default value of the http_insecure attribute.
.TP
.BR $HOME/.udocker/containers/<container-id>/container.conf
udocker container specific configuration file. Enables to changing the value of the Config class attributes for a specific container. 
.TP
.BR /etc/udocker.conf
udocker host configuration file. Parsed before the user configuration file.

.SH SEE ALSO
The udocker complete documentation at https://github.com/indigo-dc/udocker/blob/master/SUMMARY.md

.SH AUTHOR
udocker maintainer (udocker@lip.pt)
